---
layout: article
title: Private and State Capitalism
<!-- quote: this is a quote <b>you</b> are not prepared for
quoteauthor: Quote Man
quotesrc: The Big Book of Quotes, 1899
quoteurl: https://www.marxists.org/archive/connolly/1901/evangel/stmonsoc.htm -->
---

When we think about the term 'socialism', the common forms of indoctrinated political thought lead us to two, well-defined concepts of what the ideology entails: 

(1) First, we are likely directed towards states likes Finland, Denmark, Sweden - “European socialism”, in which enterprises are still owned as private property in the hands of a small, elite oligarchy but the wealth generated by labor is heavily, progressively taxed. This “redistribution” of wealth is then dedicated to the creation of a sizable welfare state, to ease the general struggle of the working-class and reduce the inevitable social tension produced naturally by capitalism's structural class conflict.

(2) Quite often however, we're directing toward the history of states such as the USSR, North Korea, the People Republic of China; we are instilled with the dystopia visions of single, monopolistic parties, state ownership over all enterprises, authoritarian rule and gulags, etc. We are reminded of “The Reds,” of twenty-first century “CommunismTM.”

In the current political discourse, the definition of socialism volleys back and forth between these two economic ideologies: rampant taxation and “hand outs”, or tyrannical state rule. The actuality, however, is that neither of these economic/political ideologies come close to the legitimate, codified definitions or ideologies of socialism, and in fact, they each characterize a distinct ideology themselves. The first is known as “social democracy”, and the latter, to the great surprise of most, is in fact known as “state **capitalism**.” 

Socialism is characterized fundamentally by the abolishment of private property. Not to be confused with personal property – your car, your television and toothbrush – private property refers **exclusively** to a society's means of production, the tools a society uses to produce the goods and services it needs to survive: workplaces, tools, factories, farms, land, raw materials, etc. The fundamental goal of socialism to forbid the allowance of private ownership of these resources – ownership in just a few, ruling hands – in a society where labor has been organized socially, where work must be done in groups. This goal is achieved by **socializing** ownership, where the tools instead belong to the workers themselves, and the immediate communities they are a part of. The people who sweat and bleed to work our tools and produce our goods, own the tools themselves, and run their workplaces through radical direct democracies. 
This critical, distinguishing definition of socialism must be clearly and obviously distinct from both “social democracy”, as well as “state capitalism.”

---
	
In social democracy, the capitalism mode of production – characterized by both private property as well as the wage-system – is still alive and well. Individual owners and inheritors are allowed to maintain private, authoritarian corporations where they offer employees their wage (often which they cannot survive on), and extract the surplus value of their labor. The intensely progressive taxation, and the formation of a large welfare state cannot be considered socialism – in fact, this welfare state exists largely to maintain the existence of capitalism itself; to ensure its very survival.

When society is organized into a class society, in which one elite group of minorities dominate and exploit are massive, impoverished majority population, then your society has been founded on an inescapable contradiction; a class contradiction. The luxury of the former is established on the suffering of the latter, and the more the ruling class lavishes itself in stolen wealth, the working class must, by necessity, but pushed farther into poverty and destitution. 

While the origins of social democracy are indeed rooted in socialism, and the desire to achieve legitimate socialized ownership through evolutionary reforms of the capitalist system, it exists now to reduce – as much as possible – this foundation conflict designed into our society. Workers still are denied democracy in their workplaces, and are robbed of the full value of their labor, but are afforded a social safety-net to keep them in relative ease as they labor.

The U.S. is not a stranger to social democracy, as a matter of fact. The “New Deal” policies of the twentieth century, struggled for and earned by the US American working class and enacted by FDR, fall well within the 21st century considerations of social democracy. Corporate income was taxed dramatically, expansive work programs were invested in, Social Security was established for the elderly, and the role of trade unions in maintaining a rising, living wage was paramount. This turn towards social democracy, along with the horrific shocks to foreign capital throughout World War II, ushered in an unprecedented period of decreasing income inequality for white, middle class Americans. 

However, the rise of neoliberalism and globalization over the last four decades, and the roll-back of American social democracy, demonstrates for us another obvious truth: if what is good for the ruling class is detrimental for the working class, then so too, what is good for the working class must be detrimental for the ruling class. And this, cannot be allowed for long. In the last forty years the US American oligarchy has re-captured both bourgeoise parties, purchased the American “democratic” process, and re-asserted its dominance in the marketplace. The reforms battle for by American socialists and communists during the early twenty-century for the working class have been gutted, and though they may be won back through a new round of working-class struggle, the truth must be acknowledged: they will never last for long.

---
	
In 1899, a full eighteen years before the Russian Revolution and twenty-five years before the counter-revolutionary rise of Stalinism in the USSR, the Irish revolutionary socialism James Connolly established the profound distinction between socialism and state capitalism: 

“Socialism, above all, is the cooperative control by the workers of the machinery of production. Without this cooperative control, ownership by the state is not socialism, it is in fact state capitalism...even if we switched towards state control tomorrow, we would still have in our industries the same unfair classification of salaries, and the same despotic rule of management. Those who work hardest would still be paid least, and the rank and file would still be denied a democratic voice – just the same as in private business.”

PhD Marxist economist Richard Wolff, in his book “*Imaging Living in a Socialist USA*”, characterizes the capitalist enterprise through four distinct parts:

(1) The board of directors, “usually comprised of fifteen to twenty people. They hire the workers and managers, receive the gross revenues from sales of the company's output, determine what to produce and where/how to produce it,” etc. 

(2) The corporation's major shareholders, the primary owners of the corporation itself, which “select the members of the board of directors and also influence how to board distributes the surplus it appropriates.”

(3) The workers – the proletarians who sell their labor for their wage and produce the goods and services self by the corporation. 

(4) The “auxiliary/indirect” workers – “the managers and supervisors, clerks, and others who create the framework for the workers to produce profitability.”

As Wolff illustrates in his work, “one group of people, the direct workers (3) produce surplus value, enriching the enterprise beyond what they're paid. Another group, the board of directors (1), appropriates and distributes that surplus value; all workers are excluded from that appropriation and distribution. The relationship of workers who produce and directors who appropriate surplus value **defines capitalist exploitation**.” 

When we review the economic and political systems of the USSR, or present-day states such as North Korea or the PRC, what we find is that they fail entirely to meet Connolly's fundamental requisites for a legitimately socialist mode of production. Instead, what he have is “state capitalism”, where rather than a private board of directors, instead workers are controlled by councils of bureaucratic ministers selected from a governing monopolistic party. 

“As in a capitalistic corporation, the council was a different group of people from those doing the direct work of producing goods and services – so the relationship between it and those direct workers was **also** exploitive. Instead of private shareholders choosing a board of directors, the Soviet government and Communist Party selected the members of the council of ministers and influenced its distribution of the surpluses that it appropriated from state enterprises.”

The working-class today has a newfound understanding of the ruling class, the “0.1%” - for example, the ~60 oligarchs which control and own more wealth than the bottom 50% of the global population. And yet, if we replace these private owners with a  new “0.1%”, formed out a massively centralized, sole “ruling party”, then we've done nothing but replace one set of masters for another, and socialism has in no way been achieved.

In the words of the revolutionary Anarchist Emma Goldman, who in 1935 examined the structure of the USSR in her piece, “*There is No Communism in the USSR*”:  

“Speaking generally, Communism is the ideal of human equality and brotherhood. It considers the exploitation of man by man as the source of all slavery and oppression. It holds that economic inequality leads to social injustice and is the enemy of moral and intellectual progress. Communism aims at a society where classes have been abolished as a result of common ownership of the means of production and distribution. It teaches that only in a classless, solidaric commonwealth can man enjoy liberty, peace and well-being.

My purpose is to compare Communism with its application in Soviet Russia, but on closer examination I find it an impossible task. As a matter of fact, there is no Communism in the U.S.S.R. Not a single Communist principle, not a single item of its teaching is being applied by the Communist party there.”

---

There can be **no** socialism without a complete revolution of the world's global economic system, without the abolition of capitalism and private property, and, most importantly and fundamentally, without **radical, democratic ownership by the workers of their workplaces, and ownership by the community of their own infrastructure.**[^afootnote]

[^afootnote]: lole